(piano music)
If you were to look at one single factor
that creates more fear than any other on a global scale
it would certainly be money.
So it's no surprise that most of us
have varying degrees of unhealthy relationships with money.
Either fear of not having enough
or losing what we have.
Karen McCall was in dire straits
when she was forced to deal with her money demons.
It turned into a deep spiritual process of self evaluation
that was in turn the start of a career
in helping others to shine the light
on their own money bogey man.
All of which she shares in her book Financial Recovery.
Karen, I'm so happy to be talking
to you about this
because many of the people watching right now
probably have an unhealthy relationship with money.
Whether it's under earning, just denying that we're in debt,
not wanting to look at
because we can't figure our way out of it,
or not saving.
It seems the most people have some kind of
dysfunction around this,
and these times have been challenging for people
with the loss of work,
but you were challenged.
You weren't always this together.
Right.
Take you back a couple decades
and you were very un-together.
Let's talk about how traumatic your relationship
with money was that really launched you on this path.
Regina, if you would have known me 27 years ago,
what you would have seen
was a successful looking business woman,
hopping in a car every morning
driving to San Francisco's financial district.
Before I would board the elevator
that would take me to the 31st floor.
I'd stop and get my latte and my big bran muffin,
and if you would have seen me,
you would have thought, "Wow, what a success."
You know, this corner office with a view
of the fantastic San Francisco Bay.
However, I had a big secret.
And that secret was that at home
on top of my refrigerator
I had this big bowl of bills,
unopened bills,
and several from the IRS.
It was just the most painful time in my life.
No one would have guessed that I was
on the verge of financial ruin.
Did you tell anyone?
Did you share this with anyone?
I didn't, I was dating a guy at the time.
A man named Tom,
and he suspected.
He was too polite to ever bring it up,
but he would show up at my house,
at my apartment rather with these audio binders
of audio cassettes, self help audio cassettes.
And I would just pile them up on my floor.
But I never had a dime to contribute to
even a cup of coffee that we had,
and he definitely suspected there was a problem.
And you were earning right?
I was earning money.
You were earning money,
but what were you doing with that money?
Well this is the thing.
I had been married before.
My kids were off to college,
and so I had a fairly sizable amount of money,
after my divorce.
However, I was alone for the first time in my life.
I had never learned about money,
and I felt way too embarrassed and too ashamed
to let anybody know that I didn't know.
So I just watched my savings go down,
and during the 80s you know,
the earliest easy time to get credit.
Yes, that's when it started.
So I got the credit cards,
and it was just, I was just in this money coma.
Just unconscious of the reality of what was happening to me.
And it wasn't until coming home one day,
and there was an eviction notice on my door,
and that was the time when I said,
"I really have to bring down that bowl."
And the good news is,
I was drawn to that stack of audio cassettes
and I pulled out one that said,
"Possibility Thinking" by Dr. Robert Schuler,
and as I listened to his soothing words,
I mustered the courage to bring down that bowl.
And open those bills?
Open all those bills.
Throw away all the duplicates.
Made a list of everything I owed.
I mean you had already gotten sobered
enough to do this, so to speak.
However, were you shocked to see what you owed?
You know, I was shocked to see what I owed,
but it was such a relief Regina,
because not knowing,
that not knowing and just worrying.
Even though I was numbing myself in many different ways,
and just not paying attention to it,
it did impact my sleep,
my sense of self-esteem.
I couldn't breath.
You know, I couldn't breath.
It was just a very, very stressful, stressful time for me.
Sure, and I think a lot of people
can relate to that.
What was interesting is because at that time
credit was becoming available, right?
But we didn't understand the implications
like we do in 2011
of what it means to not be credit worthy.
After you've gotten drunk on credit for 20, 30 years
that's our savings, we don't even bother to save.
Put it on the card.
That's created a whole different psyche
about this worthiness,
"Oh my god, I'll lose my credit rating."
And we'll get into that in a little bit
because that's part of this kind of drunken debt cycle.
That we've got sucked into.
It's a really important concept.
I look forward to talking to you about that.
Well I mean, we can go linear on this,
but let's make sure we get back to that.
Okay.
Okay, so then you had gotten to a point,
I love this part in your book where,
you had to choose between your car payment,
you're a sales person so you had to have a car.
Right.
And whether or not you could afford your rent.
And then tell us what happened from there.
Okay, well that night, that I listed all the bills.
Two things became crystal clear.
One was, I couldn't keep my car and my apartment,
and the other thing was I had to come up with money quick.
So I bought a San Francisco chronicle.
I poured over the classifieds,
and I found an ad "Professional Couple in Pacific Heights
"Seeks Cook Five Nights a Week".
And that afternoon, I was in their
beautiful Pacific Heights Mansion
interviewing to be their live in cook.
It was a little confusing to them,
but then again I made up a story
about this is an opportunity for me to save and get ahead.
Yeah, you looked a little bit over,
A little different than most people have.
Who are qualified as their cook.
Yes, yes, and I had this job in the financial district.
Did you know how to cook?
I did.
I did know how to cook, yes.
The other thing, was I need to come up with money fast.
So that next Saturday,
I held a sale in the courtyard of my apartment building,
and I sold everything I owned.
You know, 40 years of precious possessions
just gone in an afternoon.
That night I moved into the maid's quarters
of their home in Pacific Heights,
and so you know,
"Hey, headed to the financial district"
and everything looked fine,
but at the end of the day,
I would come home, put on an apron,
change out of my business suit,
put on an apron and head to the kitchen.
I will tell you, that, did I want that to be a secret,
did I feel shame about that?
Yes.
Even my daughters, I didn't tell the truth.
I just said, "Again, this is an opportunity for me
"to save money, get ahead."
No, I was in dire straits.
And the low point must have been
missing your grandma's funeral.
Oh my gosh.
That was when I wrote the book,
probably one of the most painful times in my life.
Remembering that story.
That because my credit cards were maxed out,
because I was ashamed to tell anyone,
I was back at a training on the East Coast.
I got the call that my grandmother had died.
My grandma had been the dearest person
in the world to me.
You had a tough childhood?
I did, and my grandmother was so dear.
I did not have money to come home for her funeral.
I was too embarrassed to ask anyone.
I mean my ex-husband, many relatives,
even my kids would have probably sent me money to come home.
But again, my secret was just,
it was so hard for me to tell the truth, even to myself.
So I missed my grandmother's funeral.
One of the things I wanted to say about that is
you know we miss opportunities
when we get in financial situations,
and quite often there will be another opportunity,
but that was a lost opportunity.
I can never go to my grandmother's funeral.
That's one of the real painful losses that I really regret.
But this shame thing surrounds money.
If we don't handle it well,
and this can be from someone
making millions of dollars a year,
to someone how has run out of their unemployment benefits.
It doesn't really matter.
It's not discriminating in that way
to have a shameful, unhealthy relationship to money.
Right?
Right,
and I think that when we think about shame,
there's two ways that I like to think about it.
There's the same that comes from the situation
that we found ourselves in.
That we're embarrassed to tell anyone about.
Then there's the shame that we grow up
and we feel inside that we're not worthy.
That there's this emptiness,
the sense of deprivation in our lives.
And so we feel as though there's something wrong with us.
You know, John Bradshaw, who wrote the forward to my book
had written the book, "Healing the Shame that Binds You."
John Bradshaw talks about the fact
that when we feel this shame,
when we didn't get our needs met when we were small,
that we almost feel that we're damaged goods.
That there's something wrong with us,
so we're coming from a shame based place.
And quite often what we will do,
we will create the outside of our life
to match how we feel about ourselves inside.
And this is very subconscious?
It's subconscious and this is the thing about
when we get into, "Okay, what do people do about it."
We want to get conscious,
because if we have these unconscious motivators
driving our behaviors
and we have no idea that's going on,
and that was certainly part of the case for me.
That it's very difficult to really change our situation.
We wonder, "Gee, I'm smart.
"Why can't I turn this around?"
So shame is that there's something wrong with me
and also the shame that our public shame,
you know, the credit report.
Our friends knowing that we've lost homes,
and all of the different things
that have happened to people.
Yes, and you point out in the book
those feelings of unworthiness,
they can turn into any number of dysfuntions
in our relationship with money.
But one of them would be overspending,
because we don't feel full in and of ourselves.
We have to fill that bucket with stuff.
Right.
But it's not satisfying.
Well you've heard the saying,
"You can never get enough of what you don't need."
I wrote that down and I love that.
You can never get enough of what you don't need.
Right, and whenever I'm speaking
people always say, "will you repeat that again please?"
Because people know that it resonates at some level.
So if there is this emptiness
and that's driving our behavior
one of the things that we'll do
is we'll think, "Oh, I want this.
"This will make me feel good."
And the advertising companies know this.
They know how to appeal to that emptiness,
and say, "If we buy this and we get this,
"or we do this, this is going to make us be okay."
And if people don't know what they really need
they're very susceptible to giving into that kind of thing.
Hence credit cards spending beyond our means.
But more importantly, spending on things
that don't really matter to us.
So you can never get enough,
because you're not satisfied.
You can never have enough shoes
if you're a shoe freak.
I mean it's never going to be enough.
This is really a psycho-spiritual issue
when you get down to it.
That's been my experience,
and in fact the very first category
I have on my spending plan is spiritual growth.
I would not have been able to take this journey
if I hadn't looked at it that way.
If I would have thought it's just about
the numbers, the dollars and cents of it all.
To me when I look back and think about the life I've had,
which you know hasn't been a pretty life.
Certainly not the early years.
Not the early years,
and I have to say, this led me to the most amazing work.
The work that I just absolutely love.
And I lost my train of thought.
That's okay.
Where was I?
Oh the spiritual part.
The spiritual part,
and so some people get sick,
and that will become a spiritual journey for them.
This was a type of disease if you will.
An addiction, a lot of addictive behaviors,
and as I fell apart financially,
there was only one thing to do.
Either give up, and a lot of people do that.
You know, they head for the bridge,
they end their life, they go to prison,
a lot of bad things can happen.
Or you say, "Okay, I cannot do this on my own."
And so there's a surrendering, a giving up
that anyone who has any kind of addiction going on,
they have to get to that point of,
I'm sick and tired of being sick and tired.
Then a willingness to surrender and say,
"There really is something outside of me.
"That I need to surrender to and draw strength from."
That can be nature, people can call that God,
their higher power, whatever they want to call it,
but where they know that there's help out there,
that's more than just the dollars and cents help.
One of the stories in your book
that was really profoundly sad
was about the young girl
who had committed suicide in college age or not too old,
who had committed suicide and had left a note
because she had become overwhelmed with debt
and had on her bed all her bills laid out.
Yes.
That she couldn't pay
and that just brought tears to my eyes.
To think a young girl would allow debt
and shame around debt to take her own life.
This is not uncommon.
This is not uncommon,
and this was a college girl.
Her mother was on a panel.
I watched her on television
and she said, "I wish she would have come to me."
I mean, can you imagine that your kid.
I mean, this is a real permanent solution
to something that didn't have to be a permanent problem.
So very, very sad when people are that isolated,
that alone, that fearful,
that they would end their life
rather than face their problem.
And when you look at it
from a spiritual point of view,
and I mean it from the highest sense,
whether you call your other part your soul,
your spirit, your higher self,
whatever we call the aspect of us
that transcends physical life,
that has incredible need for expression and creativity
is highly intelligent aspect of each one of us,
that part wasn't, that part isn't,
doesn't resonate with units of currency by nature.
That part of us is just purely expressive.
It's come to learn and to experience life on this planet,
and here we are in a system that binds everyone
to units of currency.
Now you can get into conspiracy theory
and all kinds of stuff around this,
but we don't need to go there.
Everyone of us understands this.
We're all bound to these units of currency.
Is there a transcendent way to look at it
so it's not just that we're keeping the money machine going
so that others can profit in a conspiratorial sense,
and as you say, when you get into credit card debt,
the house always wins, so there's truth in this.
We get it.
What is a transcending way we can begin looking at money?
Then I want to start going into
some of the real basics here.
Well if we think about the fact
that we have this emptiness,
and you know, the emptiness usually
is about wanting some kind of a spiritual connection.
So all of our behaviors are attempting to do this
however you can't meet your spiritual needs
through material means.
However, if we tune in as a beginning,
a way of identifying this deprivation
that exist in our life,
and we may use the money as a way of saying,
"I'm going to start tuning into my needs.
"I'm going to start taking care of myself."
As we take care of this outer deprivation
it does start pushing the person inward,
and they're not so distracted then
by the financial aspect.
Distracted from what they really value
and what's important to them.
So it sort of an inside/outside job,
but also an outside/inside job.
We do have to use the resources we have,
our time, energy, and money
to start healing ourselves
and finding out what our creativity is,
what are our gifts,
what do we want to do in the world.
And if people are in survival mode
and they're worried about how they're going to buy food,
put food on the table, or pay their rent or their mortgage.
It's pretty darn hard to be creative,
and to get to that place.
Absolutely, because this is the hallmark
of having an unhealthy relationship with money.
We're in fear.
We're in overwhelmed,
as you said deprivation, shame,
these are all very counterproductive
when it comes to living a joyful and creative life.
So you say that money for a lot of people
is the bogey man,
it's best left in the dark.
We don't want to deal with it.
Let's start at the beginning of that journey.
Well fear, you know,
when we think about the bogey man,
we think of ourselves as little kids
kind of afraid in our bedrooms
and the bogey man's in the closet.
So as the parents come in and turn the lights on
and open the closet, and help us see,
Hey, it's not there.
So we have to do a similar thing.
The fear, and anything that kind of grows in the dark.
Like your bills in that bowl.
Yeah, the bills in the bowl.
On top of the refrigerator.
And mold, and so we need to shed light,
and we have to know that we're not our debt.
We're not even the money we have.
What we are is we're valuable.
We're worthwhile, we deserve to have
a quality of life that's meaningful and satisfying.
And, so that's where we have to start.
You know, we have to bring things into our consciousness,
into the light, if you will.
And then, it's a combination of saying
I want to get to that place of having
faith and hope that there's going to be
a different outcome for me.
However we have to do the, we have to take the action.
You know, in the book I tell a story about
going down under the Golden Gate bridge one day
when the walls were closing in and I was just so
depressed and just in so much fear.
And I drove out and looking across the bay,
and seeing the Golden Gate Bridge,
and just seeing how incredibly beautiful it was,
I thought this is free and this
can never be taken away from me.
And in that moment, nothing had changed,
but everything had changed, because I felt
this bigger connection.
And I also thought, this is free
and I can come enjoy this anytime.
So, when were doing the financial recovery process,
when were working the financial recovery process,
what we wanna do is have people find ways that they
start healing themselves that cost less or no money.
So they don't keep spending and depleting
their resources without ever touching
what their real needs are.
[Regina] Absolutely, that's beautifully stated.
Because this affects everything in our lives.
It affects our relationships, not just with ourselves
but with other people.
As you say, it takes us down roads that we really
would never choose to go down, simply because
we feel in lack and we don't have the means
to get where we wanna go.
So, lets talk about, I think this is a good time
to talk about Laszlo's hierarchy of needs.
Because this is a big one, a lot of people
pay it lip service, oh I'd love to have
a million dollars in the bank.
But, that's not where their thoughts and energy goes.
Well, it was sorta after the fact, I remember from
college psychology, learning about Abraham Laszlo,
who talks about people who are self actualized.
He says , you know, that we have to take
care of our survival needs first.
Our home, our shelter, our food, water, sex,
and then we move us to our safety and security needs,
and then our self esteem needs, and you know, on and on
so that we get to the place where we are self actualized.
And he studied the people that are
self actulized have met these needs.
And so, I was, after I had been in business a few years,
and realized the success rate of people
healing their relationship with money,
I thought, this is what we've been doing through
the spending plan process and tracking.
People have been working on, first their survival needs,
making sure that they're taking care of those.
Their safety and security needs.
We're looking at where the deprivation
exists in all those areas, and earlier,
when people are in a lot of worried, they're caught more
in a money life drain, where their quality of life,
just becomes narrower and narrower.
So then, Laszlo talks about how do we have
a more expansive life.
And that's what we wanna be able to do,
get to a places where we'e connected with what our
values and what's important to us .
And we're about to use our resources
to have that kind of a life.
So, Laszlo was great to remember,
Oh, I remember Laszlo's hierarchy of needs
and realizing that the work I was doing with people
was really very similar.
That's what I had done, I wasn't consciously
going, oh I'm doing Laszlo's hierarchy of needs
[Regina] But you were.
But after the fact, looking back,
that's exactly what I had done.
[Regina] Let's start getting into
some of the practical points.
Now let's say you're in debt, and at this point
you may have even lost your job.
Maybe you're on unemployment, or it's running out.
Now, that's a pretty desperate,
that's a desperate place to be
in the worst case scenario, for all of us.
Right.
[Regina] There might be a time in all of our lives,
when we've each been there.
Right.
[Regina] When we don't have money
to feed ourselves, you know.
How would you start in that place?
Because that's not a place of empowerment.
No, that's a place of fear, oh my gosh, and shame.
How could I have gotten to this point.
And so I think it's really important,
and I know when i found myself there,
I needed to first admit that I needed help.
That I just couldn't go it alone.
And, this is gonna look different for different people.
Some people might seek a 12 step program,
like debtors anonymous, which is a free program,
based on the 12 steps of Alcoholics Anonymous.
Some people might find a good friend, somebody.
They might find a pastor, a therapist,
a financial recovery counselor, but someone
where they can say, I don't know what I am going to do.
So that their not in it alone.
And I know when I was there, there were days that,
it wasn't just one day at a time,
it was one moment at a time.
I would think, today I have a roof over my head,
today I have money for food, and it was just,
and also, trying to focus in on
what I had that I could be grateful for.
It's so easy to be, just feel,
just this fear take over so that we completely
lose perspective that we do have anything.
Like, we have a beautiful place that we can
go out, and perhaps do a little meditating,
or that we have a friend that we can take a walk with.
So, it's finding that place of having
some kind of faith and hope, but also,
we have to back that up with foot work.
And so, no matter how desperate someone's situation is,
I would say the first thing is asking for help,
and saying I'm going to look at the true reality,
the complete reality of my financial picture.
I may not be able to do it in one sitting,
but I'm going to know what the situation is.
And, Regina, I have had so many clients come in,
and the situation seemed impossible.
I wouldn't even know, even if I had
several years experience, I would go,
I have no idea what the solution is going to be.
However, just beginning to take action,
and not, it doesn't have to be tons,
it could be just knowing what the next step is.
It's really hard to know how we're gonna get
from here to where we wanna be.
And so, if we just know what that next step is,
I could say to people, because I had seen
it happen for myself, I had experienced it,
but I had seen it happen for a lot of people,
is that solutions will appear that are better
that we could have imagined.
[Regina] When you talk about such example in your book,
about a couple, it was two women.
And, one of the women was severely in debt.
It was her house, her partner was living
at her house with her, and she was too ashamed
to even tell her partner, I'm busted, I'm broke.
I can't continue, and yet she met with you,
and she finally told her partner,
and her partner said, I've been feeling like it's
not really right for me to be living in your house anyway.
Why don't we be real partners, let me pitch in,
and pay into your house.
And she was able to pay her debts.
And then you must have helped her,
at that point, start looking at, how did you get there?
Exactly, because she didn't want
to go back in that same place.
And the things is, here she was hiding out from her partner.
The person that she loved, was sharing her life with,
and keeping it a secret from her.
And so she was also feeling, not an intergrity
in her relationship.
So, it was bothering her on two levels.
And, one of the things we had talked about
was what her fear was.
And her fear was that she would be rejected by her partner.
And it was just the opposite.
And that's the thing, if we don't
tell the people we love the truth,
we will never be able to take in
the love and support they offer us,
because we will think, oh yes,
but if they only knew the reality
of the situation--
[Regina] There's some corruption there.
There is, and so she got to experience
this acceptance and this love, and this solution.
And it made the relationship stronger,
and you also identify the important,
the very important point, was that she knew
unless she changed her behavior,
she could end up back there again.
[Regina] Yes.
And that's what people have to watch
when they get a quick fix.
Or if there is an infusion of money
and makes things better for a while,
or if people file bankruptcy, and now
they have been relieved of their debt.
It's so easy, people get out of debt all the time.
We want something that's sustainable for people.
So that they don't go back into
the same situation over and over.
[Regina] Because that's what usually happens.
People's relationship with money is what it is,
good, bad, or indifferent, until you do something.
Until you say, I'm really gonna confront this,
and stay commited.
[Regina] We were talking a moment ago, about a person,
one of the many, many, many millions of people,
in desperate straits.
And having to, A, know that you are not alone, seek help.
Be able to start looking at how did I get here,
what are my beliefs.
And what I love about your book is you take people
through all of these steps, and they have to very,
if they wanna participate and use this as their study guide,
what an inexpensive, efficient way to look at your finances.
Thank you.
[Regina] You go through and you have to look at
how am I behaving, why am I feeling the way I do
about one thing after another.
It really requires evaluation.
And from that point, as you say, even a person,
like yourself, whose an expert in this area
can't tell them how to dig out all the time.
But, they'll start recognizing
assets in their lives, solutions, right?
Finding beauty and joy again.
That's really part of it, isn't it?
Absolutely, yes.
And another thing I wanna say,
when you were mentioning earlier,
earlier in our interview, about plastic and how
disconnected we are from our money.
You, know casinos have known this for years.
They change people's cash into chips, so it's not real.
So another things that's important for people as they
embrace this as a process, is that they need to know.
Because plastic isn't going to disappear.
I mean, it's just not, you know what I mean?
And maybe something will replace it,
but the plastic or whatever will replace it,
is basically designed to keep us
disconnected from our money.
And so, it has to be a very conscious decision, that I am
going to, regardless of how our financial system works,
I'm gonna be mindful of my money.
I'm going to be a steward of my money.
I wanna get my arms around it so that I understand
not only the dollars and cents so I can get smart
about money and how to handle it.
But I also wanna know about advertising,
and how it affects me.
I wanna understand the lost opportunities
if I'm carrying credit card debt,
and sending all that money to,
to financial institutions and helping them get rich.
So that people really educate themselves about money
and how difficult it is to stay connected.
Because believe me, if we're not connected,
we're going to spend more money.
Statistics show, if people use plastic,
even if they pay their credit cards off every month,
even if their using debit cards,
people will spend 23 to 30% more.
[Regina] Than if they had cash in their wallet.
Than if they're paying cash or
if they're keeping a register so they see--
[Regina] Writing checks.
Keeping their checkbook, even if they're
using their debit card and they go home and they are
tracking it, this is the amount of money I spent today.
They're mindful, they're conscious.
So, I've had people say, if I had to write it down,
I decided not to spend it.
[Regina] Yes.
And so just, because there's a lot of mindless spending.
[Regina] We're encouraged to spend mindlessly.
Our entire society is wired to have us spend mindlessly.
So, we wanna be mindful, and then once we know
how we're spending our money, we can discern,
how do we feel about that.
Is this something that I feel good about?
Is this adding to the lifestyle that I wanna have?
Is this supporting my value system?
Or am I unconsciously frittering money away,
in areas that, actually, I don't feel that good about?
And so, that's kinda the start.
And so, if we track, tracking is one of the
number one things to do.
Is, I am going to get very conscious of
and connected to, my money by tracking everything I spend.
Now, what we have is, okay, I'm connected to the act,
and so I can make a decision of this is a good thing or not.
And then we end up with data, and we can say, okay,
and this is another really important thing,
people think of it as a budget,
I call it a spending plan, because budgets
can have a negative connotation,
like diets, where there are no goodies,
and now instead of rear-view mirror accounting,
maybe looking at it every few months,
or maybe even once a year, just at tax time.
If we can say, I'm gonna plan,
it's like planning a trip and knowing where you're going.
How do I want to end up, how do I wanna end this month?
What are the things that are important to me?
So, we make plan going into the month,
and we track against that.
And, if we wanna get to know ourselves,
we then wanna look at it and say,
if I deviated from my plan, what was the reason?
And there's usually one of three reasons.
One, didn't plan enough, or planned too much,
because I don't really know yet.
Two, something came up that I could not have anticipated.
For example, they blew a tire, somebody died
and they had to buy an airplane ticket and fly some place.
They didn't know that going into the month to plan.
Then the third one is, I saw it, I wanted it, I bought it.
[Regina] Now.
Now, and we usually will rationalize
and justify that behavior.
[Regina] Oh, I've done that.
I have too.
We're all great at doing that.
And the thing is, is that, if we
ask ourselves those three questions,
if we're that connected to our money,
we're asking ourselves, what are my motivations, and, if I'm
not spending in the way I want, which one of these three?
Now, we're really getting, we're changing things.
We're going to change, and recognize
the sabotage that we're doing.
[Regina] Um-hm. That would be quite
a taking account in our life.
That's it, it's the taking account.
[Regina] To see that in general.
Where our psyche is, where our emotions are.
And what's interesting, you know,
when you're talking about that.
If a person needs to take stock and track their expenses,
as you say, do this planning,
a lot of people would have resistance to this,
right off the bat, thinking, I don't have
that much to spend as it is.
I do not want to put that kind of a limit on myself.
And yet, you have situations where, if a person
feels like that, coming from a place of deprivation,
for example, you end up spending all these little increments
on things that aren't necessary,
and then when you have to have something that's necessary,
there's no money there.
Right.
[Regina] Like dental work, for example.
That's the great sabotage.
The other reason that people resist looking at things,
yes they have this fear that, oh some, you know,
I'm gonna set limits for myself?
[Regina] I'll have have no pleasure in life.
Oh, I'll have no pleasure in life.
And the reality is, it's the opposite.
However, the other resistance that people have is,
they may see something that they have to change.
So, let's say someone is not nourishing
themselves very well.
They're eating a lot of fast food, spending money on it.
They're eating out all the time.
And they know that they're spending way more money
than is appropriate for the money that they have.
So if they look at it, then they're going to have to
make a decision because they're meeting some need,
there's some payoff for them in doing that.
It maybe social, it may have other contributors.
And so, again, ah then I'm not just looking at the money.
What am I gonna do about my social life.
You know, this is how I spend time with my friends.
And so, again we have to take it to several levels,
and the numbers will tell the stories
that we want to start exploring.
And seeing how we can have a different way
of meeting our social needs and meeting those
needs that are important to us.
But in ways that cost less or no money.
We wanna look at how we spend our time,
our energy and our money.
Those are all resources that are going to either
leave us feeling depleted or, hopefully,
feeling fulfilled and that life is worth living.
[Regina] Yes, and when you're just spending needlessly,
or unconsciously might be a better word,
often, because there's always this feeling
against a person's back, I shouldn't be doing this.
I shouldn't be doing this, I'm running up a little debt,
or what not, that puts a person into a position
of settling or making due, with a quality of experience
or stuff or whatever that is not really what you want.
But you can afford it now, it's on sale.
Whether it's a two for one meal at a crumby place
that you wouldn't normally eat at, or whatever it is.
Let's talk about how we compromise our self
when we're not willing to look at our finances
and we're not budgeting for what we really love.
And spending beyond our needs just the same.
I think about it, Regina, as doing without,
making due, or overdoing.
And these are all behaviors that we wanna look at.
So, if we think about doing without.
Once we become conscious we may realize
we're doing without things that rare really important to us,
but we're spending this money over here.
And we're spending it, perhaps, on other people.
Then there's the making due.
And, I don't wanna confuse people.
Frugality is a good thing.
People of that as a negative word, kinda being cheap.
But I'm talking about careful spending.
However, if people are making due, for example,
let's say they do love food, and love going out,
but they're doing, you know, these cheap restaurants
because they have a coupon.
They might decide, that's making due,
I'd rather eat out less often,
and have it be a really nice experience.
[Regina] Yes.
And there are ways that people make due
that are not a part of being careful, but it's settling for.
You know, yes the outfit isn't quite right,
but it's on sale.
By the way, sales are such a tricky thing.
It's a set up for people to make due
and not feel satisfied, and buy things
that they will never use, or they don't feel good about it.
Also, sales can be a way of attracting people
to something that they weren't planning on spending.
And so I tell people, it's not a good deal, if it's on sale,
unless you were planning on buying it anyway.
[Regina] Yes, very true.
So people can get really trapped in the whole sale thing.
[Regina] You don't just head out on a Saturday morning
with your charge card because Macy's has just sent you
their flyer about the weekend sale.
That's dangerous, you're saying?
That's dangerous.
When people just go into stores
looking for things to buy, that's dangerous.
If you go armed with your list, and your plan
and knowing what your needs are,
you can completely turn what can turn out to be
a negative experience where people will feel
really hung over and remoseful afterwards,
to feeling, oh, I did a good job yesterday.
And, then the overdoing is, you know,
that can be the overspending.
But it can also be the overdoing,
the overspending our time, our energy, our money.
And again, it's just this frenetic way
that we spend all of our resources.
All three of those states, doing without,
making due, and overdoing, leave us
in a state of deprivation, and that
just starts the cycle over and over again.
So, again, when we plan our spending
we wanna be looking at those categories of our life.
Those categories in our spending plan.
And, we wanna ask ourselves, am I doing without?
Am I making due, or am I overdoing?
And we wanna have that balance.
This is where, if we recognize,
for example, that we're overdoing.
This is just another way that people can
distract themselves from their life.
So we can create time deprivation.
We can create the money deprivation.
And all of it is a way of keeping us distracted
from what's really important and what we value.
[Regina] Um-hmm, and classically speaking,
this is something that we often assign to women.
Women are the ones that are going to
go charging, no pun intended, into the world
on a weekend toward a sale.
But, can you talk a little bit about,
is there really a difference between genders?
Or is it just what we spend our money on?
Well, women seek help more often than men.
And so, I certainly saw more women in my business.
However, men have their things as well.
And, gosh, a study a few years ago showed that
the number one thing that got men into trouble
with money was cars, and for women it was relationships.
The codependency.
And, now, what I've seen over the years,
is with electronics, and big TVs and toys.
And so, in addition to cars, men may have different things.
We may have our spa treatments, and our clothes
and our manicures and pedicures that we spend money on,
and our self help stuff.
And men may have it be the things they enjoy.
[Regina] Technology.
And sports, going to the sports bar with their buddies.
And so again, if they find they're dropping
several hundred dollars a month doing that,
and they really can't afford to do that,
then they like watching sports and being with their buddies,
it's just finding another way to do it
so they're not dropping all that money doing it.
So, men suffer from this as much as women do.
It's just that they don't speak about it as often,
and they don't seek help as often as women.
[Regina] Is there a different relationship though,
to money, between men and women,
in that, if you want to look at it as
traits that are genetically passed down.
Women haven't really been in the workforce that long.
And none of us have had credit cards for that long.
Men, it seems, my observation has been,
it's very common for men to,say, declared bankruptcy.
Much more common than all the women I've known.
It was just like women would do almost anything,
they'd practically sell themselves
to stay away from bankruptcy.
Where for a man it's another decision to be made.
And it's like, oh I'd go make it again.
Yes, men and women are different.
They say women are from Venus
and men are from Mars.
So, we do make decisions different.
And that may, also men tend to have
a higher risk tolerance for investing
and taking risks in business than women do.
And so, yes I definitely did see those differences.
However, the process of financial reovery
was the same for both.
[Regina] It's the same fundamental truths.
It's the same fundamental truths.
And the same fundamental process, to help people
get to that place where they're living a life,
a values based lifestyle, that is based on the vision,
that hopefully people can create for themselves
when they're out of survival.
[Regina] So we talked about, a little bit ago,
just on a really practical level,
the need to get in touch with the truth of your situation.
And then you talked about making a financial plan
that accommodates the things that you love.
If you're a movie goer, you don't just say,
no, we have to pay off the credit cards,
no more movies for you.
That's self sabotage, in another way.
Black and white thinking doesn't work.
All or nothing doesn't work.
And, I have five grandchildren,
and I love taking my grandchildren shopping.
And one of the things that my grandson told my daughter.
She called me once when they were shopping for shoes,
and she said, mom, I could shoot you.
I'm trying to get Nicholas to buy these
inexpensive shoes and he says,
Grandma says you only buy what you love.
(laughter)
And so, I have taught the kids to,
rather than just a lot of stuff,
buy things that you love and that you're going to use.
And, if it's clothes, buy clothes that you love
and that you're going to wear.
Because that's how we get to the point of enough.
And, by the way, we wanna start teaching our children
these lessons, modeling it for them.
Helping kids learn to delay gratification
by giving them some experiences
of evaluating how important this is.
You know, buying a little time
so that they can think it through.
And have to sleep on it for a few days,
rather than just giving in impulsively
to the kids and the things they want.
[Regina] Lets talk about the reflection.
Not of a person whose having a really difficult time,
but of someone, you even mention
Michael Jackson, in your book.
But someone whose doing really really well,
but has a, still ends up in the same place.
He was in horrible debt and the time of his birth.
I mean at the time of his death, excuse me.
At the time of his death.
Well, you know I wondered if they would
let me put the story in the book,
because as I was watching the story unfold,
when Michael Jackson died, I was
thinking of what I have in the book
called the Money Life Drain.
And it talks about, here we know that Michael Jackson
had made millions and millions of dollars.
But we also knew that he was millions of dollars in debt.
And on the verge of losing Neverland.
And he was definitely a compulsive spender.
They talked about the fact,
let's just remove the whole idea of drugs, okay.
He had behaviors with money for a long time
that had been in the news,
and people talked about his compulsive shopping,
and all of his debt.
And how much money it took him to run his life.
And, so, when he died, I recognized the same things
that I talk about in the Money Life Drain.
Where you have financial burdens,
overspending, worrying about debt.
And then the next level is you need,
you have pressure to work and earn more money.
And you just keep going down hill,
and eventually, you end up with
emotional, financial, and spiritual depletion.
Well, I thought, you know they said
that Michael was definitely into the drugs.
He had lost so much weight, he was
wearing three layers of clothing to not look so thin.
But, you know that he had a lot of pressure.
Here he was, in his addiction,
having problems sleeping, and he had to go on tour.
And there were a lot of people saying,
hey, he can do it, he's healthy.
And the truth was, he wasn't.
But he was caught in the Money Life Drain,
and he needed to go on that tour
to satisfy his creditors and keep from
losing some of his property.
And, so I really feel that that really did lead--
[Regina] That makes sense.
You add the other addictions, and I know
it's a bigger, more complex story than that,
but--
[Regina] But if you're about to lose
your dream because you've overspent.
And he had a big dream, and overspent in a big way.
Of course, he's gotta be suffering
from severe anxiety and lack of sleep.
And it makes sense that he would be
downing all these prescription drugs, and who knows what.
And the fact that, you know there's been a lot said
about the fact that as a child,
he didn't really have a childhood.
So that emptiness that we talked about in the beginning,
that drives a lot of our behaviors with money.
He talked about that in some of his interviews.
That feeling of being lonely.
And so even with all of that money,
and all of that success, you know,
this may have been someone who
really felt a lot of spiritual depletion.
That really set him up for all of these behaviors.
So, I felt a lot of empathy and compassion.
And I also thought, you know,
there's more to the story here.
So I was thrilled that they let me
use that story in the book.
Because I thought, here's an example,
we think of people that don't make very much money,
we think of a certain type of person
that has money problems,
but we see the Michael Jacksons, we see the movie stars,
we see the athletes, we see the lottery winners.
We see them get large sums of money,
sometimes quite suddenly,
and sometimes they work for it over time.
However, they can be quite ill equipped to handle it,
and if they don't have a sense of who they are,
they're really at risk for having end up being
more of a curse than a blessing.
And then there's a lot of people who
have money and do great things.
So, money is a good thing.
I don't want anyone to think I'm saying
money is not a good thing.
However, you know, we have the people that
have a lot of money and do great things in the world,
and then we have a lot of people that go on a very
self destructive path when they have that kind of money.
[Regina] And if could almost equate
the term money with energy.
That we deserve the energetic support,
we should have the energetic support that we deserve
in life, and yet we have to define what that is.
What that is.
And we wanna have role models.
I really recommend that people
read biographies of their role models.
And, of course, a role model for me
has always been Oprah Winfrey.
This is someone that absolutely created her passion.
And she's just retired from the
25 years of being on the show.
This is one of the wealthiest women in the world.
And, she has, she enjoys her life,
and she makes no qualms about it,
she doesn't apologize about it.
But she also gives a lot of money away.
Has great satisfaction from that.
And so--
[Regina] She loves her work.
She loves her work, and she's helped
changed a lot of people's lives.
So she has the satisfaction of a career,
where she makes good money,
but she also has that satisfaction of knowing that she's
really made a difference in a lot of people's lives.
To me it doesn't get better than that.
[Regina] It doesn't, and that is a key for a lot of people.
They're slogging long, doing what they
don't like to do to survive so that they can
spend a little time doing what they do what to do.
And sometimes the thing you love doing
is not going to be what makes you money.
There is an interesting balance in there.
Dan Melman wrote a book on it,
called The Four Purposes of Life, which addresses that.
Does your passion always have
to be the way in which you earn your bread, so to speak.
They may not match up, but there are ways
to fill that creative and spiritual well within yourself,
so that the other is more exceptable, even.
It's going for a higher purpose, even if
it isn't maybe your dream job.
How do you rectify that, the way you look at it?
I think that one of the ways that people rectify it,
you know, there is this misconception
that we're all going to find work that we
absolutely love and then the money will follow.
And that isn't true for everyone.
Now, I have a chapter in the book called,
Is your work working for you and the money isn't?
Is the money working for you and the work isn't?
Are neither working for you?
So, for people who have not been able
to find the work that they absolutely love,
it's very important then, that they are creating,
outside of their work, these interest that they have.
And these things that give their lives meaning.
So, I think it is a misconception
that do what we want and the money will follow.
But we can adjust, if we really are in a
very unhealthy work environment
then it is important to look at that.
And again, people can't look at that
if they are in survival mode with money.
And I quite often ended up feeling like a career counselor.
Because as people would start improving
their finanacial situation, now they could entertain
this concept of right livelihood and their work.
And quite often, it was, no they could make their work
manageable and they could make the most out of it.
But it was with the rest of their life, then,
that they are going to meet this other need,
of their creativity and making sure that they are
making a difference in what's important to them.
[Regina] That makes perfect sense.
And this gets us to the story of enough.
For some people there isn't enough.
And they just have to acquire more and more and more.
Whether they're in a thing they love or not.
There is just no such thing as enough.
How do you define what is enough,
for you as an individual?
That's a fantastic question.
There's an exercise I have in the book,
and I also do at workshops,
where I take people through a meditation
looking at what their earning ceilings are.
And what we do is, we go to different levels
and we start with a very low level
and then we get to a high level.
And you can see where people have
reached their earning ceiling.
You know their eyes will pop open,
or they'll start giggling, they feel
very uncomfortable in their body.
And in all the years that I've been doing this,
I've only had one person who realized
that she could be enough even if
she was at this very, very low income level.
Like I said, in all the, with all the people
I've done this with, it's only one.
And what she said is she would make her life enough.
She would look for other people in a similar situation.
She would look at sharing resources,
perhaps sharing a home, perhaps sharing cars,
perhaps putting gardens in and having,
she would just find other people in this situation.
And so, the big question for a lot of people,
and I feel that the other part of this that's important is,
if we know that we want to have a certain lifestyle.
And, let's say a school teacher, for example,
who doesn't make very much money, but they love their work.
There has to be a match between the money they make
and the lifestyle they choose.
Because otherwise, here they have work that they love,
but it's never going to be enough,
because they don't shop and they don't live
the lifestyle based on the salary that they have.
And so, that's one of the things about getting to enough,
is that if we do have work that we love,
then we have to adjust our lifestyle to meet that.
So, a school teacher, and I have someone
in mind thinking about that.
She shops at certain places and not others.
She feels rich because she absolutely loves what she does.
And so, it's enough.
And so when there is this disconnect between
the lifestyle that we wanna have,
and the work that we are going to do,
this is where a lot of under earning, you know,
it feels like we're under earning.
But if that's a choice and we want to stay there,
then we have to bring the lifestyle to meet that.
If our lifestyle desires are here, and we don't have enough,
then we may have to change our careers
and think about how we are going to earn more money.
So, it all starts, you know, as I said,
it's kinda this outside/inside job.
As we are more and more in touch with meeting our needs,
then we can get to some of our wants and desires.
Then we can explore this work thing.
And hopefully doing that month after month after month,
people can start identifying for themselves, what is enough.
One of my best days recently, was a day with my family
celebrating my oldest grandson's high school graduation.
And I felt so alive and so, you know,
the world was just fantastic because
I had this whole day of being with my family.
You know, from the little kids,
to my daughters and their husbands,
and some ex-husbands were there,
you know, it was just a wonderful time.
And so that's what we want, that's what enough is.
Where what we're doing, it's not
dependent on the money that we have.
Now, I do wanna say that I'm very empathetic
with people who really do not have money,
they really are worrying about how to put food on the table,
I've been there.
But, I'm also talking about if
we wanna get to a place of enough,
there has to be congruence between
our lifestyle and what we're earning.
[Regina] We just have to be really honest with ourselves.
Otherwise, you know it's the credit cards,
then all of a sudden, even the work that we love
is being compromised because we live beyond our means.
And then that stresses us.
We've got the credit card debt,
the money is going to make the banks rich,
and really impacting us, so.
[Regina] Back to our hierarchy of values.
It comes down to that.
And we said we'd get to it, and before we say goodbye,
I want to get to it.
This whole new notion, oh my god,
I'm no longer credit worthy.
This is a whole new phenomena, really.
And it has a huge impact on society at large right now.
You know, I call it the public shame sheet.
The credit report.
And I have had people, and I went through this.
I tried to protect my credit.
25, 26 years ago, I would rather go without food
then think of not paying a credit card bill.
And what happened, I eventually got to the place
where I couldn't.
Now, I'm fortunate in that I never filed bankruptcy,
I always paid everything back, but it took me a lot longer.
And it definitely impacted my credit report.
What I found, if people are committed to a recovery process,
their credit report is not going to
stop them from creating their life.
There's this false sense of the credit report then
is going to give us more credit.
That's the last thing that we need,
if that's what's gotten us in trouble in the first place.
But it it, there's a lot of pressure,
and I am not minimizing that.
Employers can look at our credit reports.
There's a lot of, we may pay more interest on things.
We may not be able to buy a new car.
We may not be able to buy a new house.
However, we do not wanna be caught in,
we will sacrifice everything to protect the credit report.
[Regina] Yes, absolutely.
And, there's quite a bit about saving your way out of debt,
and getting back into some patterns of saving.
So that if something does come up,
you don't have to put it on a 20% credit card,
you can just pay it.
So,don't just throw all your money at your credit card.
Take some and put some money aside.
And many, many other very practical and sound
pieces of advice, but I think what I love most
about the book is the fact that your taking people through
this really deep, I think, pyscho-spiritual
journey of themselves to assess this
and rebuild their lives.
And I do love the the chapter,
and I think it's very interesting for people
to think about saving their way out of debt.
When they explore their relationship to debt,
but also their relationship to savings.
And you can't stay out of debt, unless you have savings.
['Regina] There you go, and so much more.
It's a beautiful book and thank you for writing it,
on behalf of all of us that are listening
and could certainly use some of that wisdom,
And thank you for your time.
I'm very happy to have met you
and had a chance to talk with you.
It's been my pleasure Regina, thank you so much.
I love Karen's pragmatic and comapssionate way
of view people and their realitionship with money.
To go deeper into your own internal work regarding money
you can buy Karen's book at through major bookseller.
If you're in need of coaching she can be reached
at financialrecovery.com
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.